\input texinfo @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename SciLisp.info
@settitle SciLisp Manual
@c %**end of header
@copying
This manual is for SciLisp (version 0.01, updated 
use
Copyright @copyright{} 2013 Tucker DiNapoli
@end copying
@titlepage
@title SciLisp Manual
@author Tucker DiNapoli
@page
@vskip Opt plus 1filll @c presumably some kind of vertical break
@insertcopying
@end titlepage
@contends
@ifnottex
@node top
@top SciLisp
@end ifnottex
This is the SciLisp manual
@menu
* Introduction:: Introduction to SciLisp and reasons for it's creation
* Usage:: How to call SciLisp and what the command line options do
* Grammar:: Informal introduction to SciLisp grammar
* Standard Libary:: The standard library of SciLisp (not much to it
                     though)
* Internals:: An attempt to describe the internals of SciLisp
* Differences from other lisps:: How SciLisp differs from other lisps,
                                 specifically common lisp and scheme.
* Index:: 

@end menu

@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction
@node Usage
@chapter Usage
@node Grammar
@chapter Grammar
@section Introduction
This section describes the syntax and semantics of the SciLisp
language. The grammar of the language is first described in an informal
way, which is hopefully easy to understand. Following this is a more
formal definition of the language using a version of EBNF.@footnote{EBNF or
Extended Backus-Naur Form is a way of describing a context free
grammar (usually a programming language) in terms of terminal and
non-terminal symbols. Briefly terminal symbols are some form of literal
text and non-terminals are rules describing how other symbols interact.}
SciLisp is very much a work in progress and while it is hoped that much
of the grammar is fairly stable it should be noted that any of this
information is subject to change. That said any changes will likely be
minor and the high level grammar will remain the same.
@node Syntax and Semantics
@section SciLisp Syntax and Semantics
@node Standard Library
@chapter Standard Library

@node Index
@unnumbered Index
@printindex cp
@bye
